# Day 1: Setup the beast

**Date**: 30/06/23

**Mood**: Motivated about this project! LFG

**Support**: Rust Book chapters 1-2-3

## Some setup things

As when any story starts, the future looks bright.
I started from the roots wit _The Rust Book_ chapters 1-2-3.
Installation is super simple on mac, to be honest. Just a simple one-liner:

    curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 https://sh.rustup.rs -sSf | sh

Migh also need a C compiler by adding

    code-select --install
You can check if everything went smoothly by doing

    rustc --version

If you have troubles with your `%PATH%` after running the previous command (meaning rust is not recognized), please check this [stackoverflow's link.](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/67656028/rustup-gives-command-not-found-error-with-zsh-even-after-installing-with-brew)

Ok now we can create some `main.rs` file and put some code int it:

```rust
fn main() { println!("Hello, world!"); }
```

Hello, world! Nothing very surprising for the code above, expect the ! after the function's name. Actually, that's because `println` is not a function but a

> macro

I guess I learn more later about them.
Big things here coming from JS/Node is the compilation step. Not that big tho, it's literally 1 command line.

    rustc main.rs
And I guess that's the wrap on how to create and compile a first Rust program.
Now come cargo! It seems it's a bit like npm for node. Use is pretty straightforward.
To create a project:

    cargo new project_name

It creates a _cargo.toml_ file, as configuration, and a /src folder where our main.rs file file is waiting for us.
We also have

    cargo check
    cargo run
    cargo build

to respectively check if the code compiles, if it runs properly and finally to compile it. Seems to be a good habit to do a lot of `cargo check` for validation before building.

## The guessing game code

```rust
    use std::io;

    fn main() {
    println!("Guess the number!");

    println!("Please input your guess.");

    let mut guess = String::new();

    io::stdin()
        .read_line(&mut guess)
        .expect("Failed to read line");

    println!("You guessed: {guess}");
    }
```

Few things to observe here:

1. we use use `std::io;` as a dependency to accept the user's input
2. there is a `fn() main {}` that encapuslates the code
3. there are `;` to end some lines (not all?)
4. lines are intended (reminds me of `GDScript`) after `io::stdin()`
5. `let mut guess = String::new();` creates a new **mutable variable** of type String.
6. So seems it means variables are constants per default.

```rust
let apples = 5; // immutable
let mut bananas = 5; // mutable
```

7. comments are made of `//` which is good
8. variable can be initiated with a type and `::new` such as in `String::new();`
9. `.read_line(&mut guess)` the `&mut guess` seems to indicate a **reference**, immutable per default but then mutable here
10. `.expect` seems to act an as error handling a bit as a return. Program would throw a warning at compilation without it.
11 In the `println` return, var is surrounded by `{}`

```rust
let x = 5;
let y = 10;

println!("x = {x} and y + 2 = {}", y + 2);
```

Would return: `x = 5 and y + 2 = 12.`

So we can use `{}` as crab's bracket to send the value of the operation.

I'm adding `rand = "0.8.5"` to the _Cargo.toml_ file to add a **library crate**. It's like a dependency used in my **binary crate**. Here the goal is to create randomness, a bit like `Math.Random()` would act.

```rust
use rand::Rng;
use std::cmp::Ordering;
use std::io;

fn main() {
    println!("Guess the number!");

    let secret_number = rand::thread_rng().gen_range(1..=100);

    loop {
        println!("Please input your guess.");

        let mut guess = String::new();

        io::stdin()
            .read_line(&mut guess)
            .expect("Failed to read line");

        let guess: u32 = match guess.trim().parse() {
            Ok(num) => num,
            Err(_) => continue,
        };

        println!("You entered: {guess}");

        match guess.cmp(&secret_number) {
            Ordering::Less => println!("Too small!"),
            Ordering::Greater => println!("Too big!"),
            Ordering::Equal => {
                println!("You win!");
                break;
            }
        }
    }
}
````

Here is the complete code for the "Guess The number" game.

1. We now implemented the generation of the random number using `rand::thread_rng().gen_range(min..=max);`
2. We've done a loop only using `loop{}`
3. We accept the input as a string
4. We then convert this string into a number
5. We handlle non number input thanks to `match` keyword
6. We then compared the input with the `secret_number`
It uses `cmp` and `Ordering`
7. If the guess is correct, we `break` the loop

This program was very interesting as it teaches us a lot about functions, variables, dependancies and building process using Rust language.

## Common Programming Concepts

### Variables

First principle is that variables are per default immutable in Rust.
You declare a variable using `let`
You can not alterate the value once you attribute it.

However when `mut` is used, variables can become mutable.

#### Incorrect code

```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
    x = 6;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```

``
  ^^^^^ cannot assign twice to immutable variable
``

#### Correct Code

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut x = 5;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
    x = 6;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```

#### Constants

**Constants** also exist and are always **immutable**. Logical, so you can not use `mut`

Also, constants have a type and be declared with `const`

```rust
const THREE_HOURS_IN_SECONDS: u32 = 60 * 60 * 3;
```

Rust’s naming convention for constants is to use all uppercase with underscores between words.

Constants are valid for the entire time a program runs, within the scope in which they were declared.

### Shadowing

This concept is about re-declaring values with `let`.

```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5;

    let x = x + 1;

    {
        let x = x * 2;
        println!("The value of x in the inner scope is: {x}");
    }

    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```

> Shadowing is different from marking a variable as `mut` because we’ll get a compile-time error if we accidentally try to reassign to this variable without using the let keyword.

By using let, we can perform a few transformations on a value but have the variable be immutable after those transformations have been completed.

We can also change the type of the var.

### Data Types

Rust being a statically typed language, the compiler must know the type of the var when it compiles.

```rust
let guess: u32 = "42".parse().expect("Not a number!");
````

Thats' what the **:u32** is here for.

#### Scalar Types

A scalar type represents a single value. Rust has four primary scalar types: **integers, floating-point numbers, Booleans, and characters.**

#### Integers

i8,i16,i32,i64,i128

u8,u16,u32,u64,u128

#### Floating Point Number

f32: single digit precision

f64: double digits precision

```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 2.0; // f64

    let y: f32 = 3.0; // f32
}
```

You can perform classic math operations on numbers: + / * -

#### Boolean

bool: true/false

```rust
fn main() {
    let t = true;

    let f: bool = false; // with explicit type annotation
}
```

#### Char

```rust
fn main() {
    let c = 'z';
    let z: char = 'ℤ'; // with explicit type annotation
    let heart_eyed_cat = '😻';
}
```

Four bytes Unicode Scalar Value.
Had to be declared with '' contrary to strings ""

## Compound

Compound vars can have multiple types into one type. They can be turples and arrays.

### Tuples

A tuple is a general way of grouping together a number of values with a variety of types into one compound type. Tuples have a fixed length: once declared, they cannot grow or shrink in size.

#### Declaring a tuple

```rust
fn main() {
    let tup: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);
}
````

The tuple is declared with each type of its components. Here the var is made of 3 different numbers. Or at least that was I was used to think about them.

To access a tuple element, we can destructure it or access it through its element index.

#### Destructurate way

```rust
fn main() {
    let tup = (500, 6.4, 1);

    let (x, y, z) = tup;

    println!("The value of y is: {y}");
}
````

Where x y z represents the appropriate elements.

#### Indexed way

```rust
fn main() {
    let x: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);

    let five_hundred = x.0;

    let six_point_four = x.1;

    let one = x.2;
}
```

We can notice here that 0 is in fact the first element. Reminds of JS again.

### The array

Array are different from tuples because all the elements have the same type.

They're similar in the way the're also fixed sized.

#### Declare an array

```rust
fn main() {
    let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
}
```

So we're classicaly using [ ] notation for the declaration. **Reminder:** It was ( ) for the tuple.

If needed to specify the type of the elements (not sure yet tbh) you'll have to do:

```rust
let a: [i32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
```

Where i32 is the type, 5 the number of elements. **Reminder: arrays are fixed sized**.

Accessing an array element is pretty easy:

```rust
let a: [i32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
let first = a[0]
let second = a[1]
```

It seems if I try to access an element which is outside of the index, the app will compile but panick and crash.

## Functions

### Conventions

Functions names are snake case: underscore + _ instead of space
> fn another_function() { }

We can call one function into another one.

```rust
fn main() {
    println!("Hello, world!");

    another_function();
}

fn another_function() {
    println!("Another function.");
}
```

### Arguments

Functions can have arguments/parameters inside the parenthesis.

```rust
fn main() {
    another_function(5);
}

fn another_function(x: i32) {
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```

Here we call **another_function** with 5 as a number in **main()**.

Below, we declare **another_function**, taking a **i32 variable type named x**. Then, it'll display its value called in **main()**.

> **Arguments types in function declarations are mandatory in Rust.**

If there are several arguments, there are separed by a comma (in call as declaration).

```rust
fn main() {
    print_labeled_measurement(5, 'h');
}

fn print_labeled_measurement(value: i32, unit_label: char) {
    println!("The measurement is: {value}{unit_label}");
}
```

### Statements and Expressions

> Function bodies are made up of a series of statements optionally ending in an expression.

Because Rust is an expression-based language, this is an important distinction to understand.

- Statements are instructions that perform some action and do not return a value.

- Expressions evaluate to a resultant value.

Statements are block scoped.

#### Functions that return values

In Rust, the return value of the function is synonymous with the value of the final expression in the block of the body of a function.

```rust
fn five() -> i32 {
    5
}

fn main() {
    let x = five();

    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```

> The five function has no parameters and defines the type of the return value, but the body of the function is a lonely 5 with no semicolon because it’s an expression whose value we want to return.

If we want to use an argument and still use the final return we can do like this

```rust
fn main() {
    let x = plus_one(5);

    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}

fn plus_one(x: i32) -> i32 {
    x + 1
}
```

We take a **i32** as x parameter and return a **i32** non named of x incremented of 1.

**Important:** If `x + 1` had a final `,` the compiler would throw an error.

Interesting point here.
We have to think about ending return value of every functions.

### Comments

Comments in code are important. Right?

```rust
// yes
// they
// are
```

No really, they do.

Here it seems we use only **//** even for multiple lines.

Prefer writing them on a line before than at the end of the line.

Nothing complicated.
